>> Will Sentance: Where does
JavaScript actually run?
Where is it running its code?
Peter, where's JavaScript running?
>> Peter: Typically in a browser.
>> Will Sentance: In the browser,
yeah, we don't open an app
called JavaScript, right?
We, run it in a browser we turn on,
now the browser is a remarkable creation.
It has so much more than just
JavaScript in it, so let's just,
we use a white pen here for
the JavaScript engine.
As part of the blue,
the overall web browser,
sort of say is, I can't draw the Firefox.
There it is JavaScript, it doesn't run
in isolation, it has a ton of features
in the web browser as well, what are the
other features that the web browser has?
Adam, can you think of some other features
the web browser has that JavaScript
does not have?
>> Adam: Like dev tools?
>> Will Sentance: Sure, yeah,
absolutely, honestly, yeah, dev tools,
let's put it in dev tools, console, yeah,
absolutely, what other things, Matt?
>> Matt: Web sockets?
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, sure, sockets.
>> Will Sentance: What other thing?
There are some really key,
two really key ones, Dan, you got one?
Can Javascript speak to the Internet?
Can it make network
requests over the Internet?
No, JavaScript does not have
the ability to speak to the Internet,
that is not a feature inside JavaScript.
So you know what,
the browser does, though,
the browser can make network requests.
The browser is this incredible app, that's
full of all of these, it's a composite
of a JavaScript engine that this bit,
plus a ton of non-JavaScript features.
One of which is the ability for
it to make network requests,
what other thing does
JavaScript definitely not have?
>> Matt: Rendering.
>> Will Sentance: Yeah, rendering,
exactly, is that in JavaScript?
No, that's in the web browser,
our HTML DOM,
that is our model, our simplified
version of what's on the page.
That's our simplified version
of what's on the page so
that we can interact with it, so
we can add stuff to that page.
Document Object Model, it's a model,
a simplified version in an object
style format of what's on the document,
which is the visual of the page.
Yeah, all these features we
cannot code for directly,
they're written in whatever
the browser is written, in C++.
Or whatever other languages,
the browser is written in,
do we write for these directly?
But people, we do have a programming
language that lets us use these features.
And that programming language is
JavaScript, but we're not actually gonna
find any of these features in JavaScript,
so how do we interact with them?
How do we interface with them?
In JavaScript we get a bunch of
what I call facade functions, and
it's not catching on, I'll be clear.
This phrase is not catching on, a bunch
of what's called, I call them facade
functions, they are functions that
look like they're JavaScript.
But are actually fronts, facades, for
web browser features and you know what?
One of those web browser
features believe it or not,
JavaScript doesn't even have the feature
of a timer that's in the web browser too.
And we get labels for
each of these features,
let's hope are perfectly aligned to
the name, that'll be very nice, right?
If they were perfectly
aligned to the name instead,
Kayla what do you think our label for
timer would be?
>> Kayla: Timer?
>> Will Sentance: That makes sense, that
would be a perfect name, but in reality,
what label do we get in JavaScript in
order to start a timer to delay a function
Kayla?
>> Kayla: Set time out.
>> Will Sentance: Set time out,
that's it, set time out is not doing
anything of interest in JavaScript
instead it's a label for
the timer built to the web browser.
Braden, what's our label for the HTML DOM,
hopefully it's like DOM, right?
>> Braydon: That would be nice.
>> Will Sentance: That'd be nice,
what is it instead?
>> Braydon: I don't know.
>> Will Sentance: Well, what label do we
have in JavaScript whenever we wanna use
a kind of collection of features of the
web browser that allow us to display, and
render, and display stuff on the page?
>> Peter: Document.
>> Will Sentance: Document,
Peter's spot on.
Exactly, Document, so
whenever you see Document,
that ain't doing anything in JavaScript.
It's a command to go and use a feature of
the web browser, that's kind of crazy.
Todd, what do we have as our label for
the feature of the web
browser that lets us do network
request speaking to the Internet?
Anyone know?
Dan you know?
>> Dan: Is it get?
>> Will Sentance: Not quite,
that's the one which we used to kind of,
that was a wrapper for the feature.
>> Dan: TCP UDP.
>> Will Sentance: What did we have?
>> Will Sentance: Not directly.
>> Kayla: Fetch?
>> Will Sentance: Fetch, Kayla's spot on,
that's our sort of newer name for
it, but we used to have a different
name for it, everyone remember?
>> Kayla: AJAX.
>> Will Sentance: No, it was something
it was xhr, everyone remember xhr?
Though, by the way, look how consistent
our names are with the underlying feature,
okay, console,
this one's a little bit more reasonable,
what's the label for console, Jeff?
>> Jeff: Console.
>> Will Sentance: Console, hold on Jeff,
excellent, Jeff landed that perfectly,
and we have other features here like
local storage, IndexedDB, all of those.
So local storage's name is local storage,
so they got better at it over time.
They definitely got better at
naming the JavaScript label for
the web browser feature over time.
But in the early days, I don't know
these were not the smartest, whatever.
Alright, so folk,
that means a big part of what we're
doing in JavaScript isn't
even JavaScript at all.
Meaning I'm gonna need to expand
my platform of JavaScript on here,
taking it from being just those
big three pieces in JavaScript.
Being the big three pieces in JavaScript,
plus,
I'm gonna have everything below here be
stuff that's happening in the web browser.
I'm gonna do in blue, and when you see
blue, it represents the web browser and
not anything to do with JavaScript,
okay folks, here we go.
It's a board wipe downtime, so turn to
your partner, turn to your neighbor and
start trying to navigate and
verbalize what this code is doing.
Give it a shot, we don't have
the tools yet to do this, but
given that we know set timeout, is gonna
be a label for timer in the web browser.
Have a think what might be happening here,
and
have a think about how
one might explain Braden.
And Ethan's instincts around what the
order of execution here might be, try and
get ahead of it.